There is almost universal agreement that economies are becoming
more complex every year and that an understanding of how an economy
works is more important than ever before. For someone who is just beginning to study economics, the task indeed appears to be a difficult one.
Economics is the study of the way in which mankind organizes itself to
solve the basic problem of scarcity. All societies have more wants than
resources, so that a system must be devised to allocate these resources between competing ends. In a very real sense, the complexity of the
economy makes it difficult to decide exactly where to start. Simultaneously, production is taking place, goods and services are being allocated, and a great number of market participants are being motivated by a
diverse set of goals. In addition, there is the complex financial system in
which individuals, firms, and governments borrow and lend funds.
Economics is divided into two major branches: macroeconomics
and microeconomics. Macroeconomics is the study of behavior of the
economy as a whole with emphasis on the factors that determine growth
and employment, and the level of prices. Macroeconomics studies broad
economic events that are largely beyond the control of individual decision makers and yet affect nearly all firms, households, and other institutions in the economy. Specialists in macroeconomics are particularly
interested in those factors that determine inflation, unemployment, and
grow thin the production of goods and services. Such an understanding
is necessary in order to develop policies that encourage production and
employment while controlling inflation.
The other major branch of economics is microeconomics. Microeconomics is the study of behavior of individual units within the economy. The division of economics has resulted from the growing complexity
and sophistication of economic research.
These two approaches and the topics they include are in fact interdependent. Individuals and firms make their decisions in the context of the
economic environment, which has an impact on the constraints the decision makers face as well as their expectations about the future. At the same
time, when taken as a whole, their decisions determine the condition of the
overall economy. A good understanding of economic events and an ability
to forecast them require knowledge of both individual decision-making and
the way in which individuals react to changes in the economic environment.
5
1. Economies are becoming more complex every year. Why?
2. What is the main division of economics?
3. What is macroeconomics «responsible for»?
4. What does microeconomics deal with?
Text 2. Economics
Economics (from the Greek «household management») is a social
science that studies the production, distribution, trade and consumption
of goods and services.
Economics, which focuses on measurable variables, is broadly divided into two main branches: microeconomics, which deals with individual agents, such as households and businesses, and macroeconomics,
which considers the economy as a whole, in which case it considers aggregate supply and demand for money, capital and commodities. Aspects
receiving particular attention in economics are resource allocation, production, distribution, trade, and competition. Economic logic is increasingly applied to any problem that involves choice under scarcity or determining economic value. Mainstream economics focuses on how prices
reflect supply and demand, and uses equations to predict consequences
of decisions. The fundamental assumption underlying traditional economic theory is the utility-maximizing rule.
1. What does Economics study?
2. How can Economics be broadly divided?
3. What is the fundamental assumption of traditional economic theory?
Text 3. History of economics
In the 1500s there were few universities. Those that existed taught religion, Latin, Greek, philosophy, history, and mathematics. No economics.
Then came the Enlightenment (about 1700) in which reasoning replaced
God as the explanation of why things were the way they were. Pre-Enlightenment thinkers would answer the question, «Why am I poor?» with, «Because God wills it.» Enlightenment scholars looked for a different explanation. «Because of the nature of land ownership» is one answer they found.
Such reasoned explanations required more knowledge of the way
things were, and the amount of information expanded so rapidly that it had
to be divided or categorized for an individual to have hope of knowing a
6
subject. Soon philosophy was subdivided into science and philosophy. In
the 1700s, the sciences were split into natural sciences and social sciences.
The amount of knowledge kept increasing, and in the late1800s and early
1900s social science itself split into subdivisions: economics, political science, history, geography, sociology, anthropology, and psychology. Many
of the insights about how the economic system worked were codified in
Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations, written in 1776. Notice that this is
before economics as a subdiscipline developed, and Adam Smith could
also be classified as an anthropologist, a sociologist, a political scientist,
and a social philosopher.
Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries economists such as Adam
Smith, Thomas Malthus, John Stuart Mill, David Ricardo, and Karl Marx
were more than economists; they were social philosophers who covered
all aspects of social science. These writers were subsequently called
Classical economists. Alfred Marshall continued in that classical tradition, and his book, Principles of Economics, published in the late 1800s,
was written with the other social sciences in evidence. But Marshall also
changed the question economists ask; he focused on the questions that
could be asked in a graphical supply-demand framework. In doing so he
began what is called neo-classical economics.
For a while economics got lost in itself, and economists learned little else. Marshall’s analysis was downplayed, and the work of more formal economists of the1800s (such as Leon Walrus, Francis Edge worth,
and Antoine Cournot) was seen as the basis of the science of economics. Economic analysis that focuses only on formal interrelationships is
called Walrasian economics…
1. The text you’ve read gives a very brief view of the history of Economics. What other names (schools, theories) can you give to contin